Make NIP-51 useful again (#880)
nostr-protocol/nips: 51.md

## Sets

Sets are lists with well-defined meaning that can enhance the functionality and the UI of clients that rely
on them. Unlike standard lists, users are expected to have more than one set of each kind, therefore each of
them must be assigned a different `"d"` identifier.

For example, _relay sets_ can be displayed in a dropdown UI to give users the option to switch to which
relays they will publish an event or from which relays they will read the replies to an event; _curation sets_
can be used by apps to showcase curations made by others tagged to different topics.

Aside from their main identifier, the `"d"` tag, sets can optionally have a `"name"`, a `"picture"` and an
`"about"` tag that can be used to enhance their UI.

| name          | kind  | description                                                                                   | expected tag items                                |
| ---           | ---   | ---                                                                                           | ---                                               |

> | Follow sets   | 30000 | categorized groups of users a client may choose to check out in different circumstances       | `"p"` (pubkeys)                                   |

Author: I agree, but that is the old name and we must change something since that wasn't working.

| Relay sets    | 30002 | user-defined relay groups the user can easily pick and choose from during variadic operations | `"relay"` (relay URLs)                            |
| Curation sets | 30004 | groups of articles picked by users as interesting and/or belonging to the same category       | `"a"` (kind:30023 articles), `"e"` (kind:1 notes) |

> | Emoji sets    | 30030 | categorized emoji groups                                                                      | `"emoji"` (see [NIP-30](30.md))                   |

Reviewer: Suggestion to add: `Interest Set` which is kind `30015`, and takes a set of `t` tags.

Reviewer: @pablof7z is it worth also mentioning Hightlight lists?

Reviewer 2: > We're doing something similar in YakiHonne related to the user preferences for content customizations via `kind-30100`. I think its better to include such specifications once for all because soon or later feeds customization will be faced (at least thats what we experienced).
> 
> ![content_settings](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/29741039/283314136-db1b35f3-a884-422b-8252-8f0ca353d85d.jpg) ![topics](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/29741039/283314148-cd974bee-589f-4d0e-b40a-65a9290447bc.jpg)
> 
> ```
> {
>   "id": "ed4291ff8ba4343ca444d03624afcee98257aba4af17410a73144ffdc369c467",
>   "kind": 30100,
>   "pubkey": "1cb0ebecfbe8e291d46c4e082df1e6a183bb321245ef29df5e2703f84b1d86e1",
>   "created_at": 1700102857,
>   "content": "",
>   "tags": [
>     [
>       "d",
>       "MyFavoriteTopicsInYakihonne"
>     ],
>     [
>       "t",
>       "YakiHonne"
>     ],
>     [
>       "t",
>       "Technology"
>     ],
>     [
>       "t",
>       "Crypto"
>     ],
>     [
>       "t",
>       "Travel"
>     ],
>     [
>       "t",
>       "Social"
>     ],
>     [
>       "t",
>       "Nostr"
>     ],
>     [
>       "t",
>       "Economy"
>     ],
>     [
>       "t",
>       "Finance"
>     ],
>     [
>       "t",
>       "Entrepreneurship"
>     ],
>     [
>       "t",
>       "Self improvement"
>     ],
>     [
>       "t",
>       "Food"
>     ],
>     [
>       "t",
>       "Marketing"
>     ],
>     [
>       "t",
>       "Art"
>     ],
>     [
>       "t",
>       "Photography"
>     ],
>     [
>       "t",
>       "Entertainment"
>     ],
>     [
>       "t",
>       "Music"
>     ]
>   ],
>   "sig": "4fdc6a423bc7320b432e2edc1e794895468894b92ad7bb9e119bd16c1a6c1d0098bbd8a33ac25856acbae222fda565d7407c17d2b09f6b326de3762ad30a8a1c"
> }
> ```

How about this from above it complies in your side and some of what @staab wants to achieve I Think his proposition is based on the advance search he has on coracle.social

Author: @Darecjo if your list is automatically named `MyFavoriteTopicsInYakihonne` I think that is an indication that you should be using NIP-78. What do you think?

@erskingardner would these things be a single standard list or multiple? It's hard to imagine someone having _interests_, which is such a generic concept, categorized in different groups. I feel like each interest is already a "group" on its own.

On the other hand one interest is translated into potentially huge number of tags -- i.e. if I'm interested in "fruits" I may have the hashtags "banana", "mango", "passionfruit" etc. Or if I'm interested in "banana" I may have "banana", "cavendish", "bananas", "plaintain", "banana-recipes", "cooking-bananas" whatever.

So what do we do? Add both a canonical standard interests list and interest sets?

Reviewer: Good question. @pablof7z added `30015` to NDK a while back and we've both been using it as a PRE. I think that there is a good reason to keep separate lists, e.g. I might have a music interests lists with music related stuff, and also an outdoors list that is all about climbing and skiing. I might want to use one or the other to view curated topic feeds.

Maybe that means there is a case to do both `10015` and `30015`, in similar style to emoji lists. Where your `10015` list is the full canonical list and can include either `t` tags or `a` tags pointing to other `30015` lists.

Reviewer 2: > @Darecjo if your list is automatically named `MyFavoriteTopicsInYakihonne` I think that is an indication that you should be using NIP-78. What do you think?

We are going to check the interests list and sets since they are more suitable for our case it is basically the same thing.

  "pubkey": "854043ae8f1f97430ca8c1f1a090bdde6488bd5115c7a45307a2a212750ae4cb",
  "created_at": 1699597889,
  "kind": 10000,
  "tags": [
    ["p", "07caba282f76441955b695551c3c5c742e5b9202a3784780f8086fdcdc1da3a9"],
    ["p", "a55c15f5e41d5aebd236eca5e0142789c5385703f1a7485aa4b38d94fd18dcc4"]
  ],
  "content": "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?iv=S3rFeFr1gsYqmQA7bNnNTQ==",
  "sig": "1173822c53261f8cffe7efbf43ba4a97a9198b3e402c2a1df130f42a8985a2d0d3430f4de350db184141e45ca844ab4e5364ea80f11d720e36357e1853dba6ca"
}
```

### A _curation set_ of articles and notes about yaks

> ```

Reviewer 3: Nitpick: Change this to ` ```json `

`draft` `optional` `author:fiatjaf` `author:arcbtc` `author:monlovesmango` `author:eskema` `author:gzuuus`

This NIP defines lists of things that users can create. Lists can contain references to anything, and these
references can be **public** or **private**.

Public items in a list are specified in the event `tags` array, while private items are specified in a JSON
array that mimics the structure of the event `tags` array, but stringified and encrypted using the same
scheme from [NIP-04](04.md) (the shared key is computed using the author's public and private key) and
stored in the `.content`.

## Types of lists

### Generic lists

> The kind `30001` has been reserved for generic lists. These must be accompanied by a `d` tag identifying the
> list, but these have no standard meaning and are generally client-specific (except in the standard cases
> specified below).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

## Standard lists

> Users are expected to have a single list of each of these types. They have special meaning and clients may
> rely on them to augment the user profile or browsing experience.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Standard lists use non-parameterized replaceable events, meaning users may only have a single list
of each kind. They have special meaning and clients may rely on them to augment a user's profile or
browsing experience.
```

For example, _mute lists_ can contain the public keys of spammers and bad actors users don't want to see in
their feeds or receive annoying notifications from.

| name             | kind  | description                                               | expected tag items                                |
| ---              | ---   | ---                                                       | ---                                               |

> | Mute list        | 10000 | things the user doesn't want to see in their feeds        | `"p"` (pubkeys), `"t"` (hashtags)                 |

Reviewer 4: Coracle currently supports `e` tag muting, and Amethyst supports `word` muting.

For example, _relay sets_ can be displayed in a dropdown UI to give users the option to switch to which
relays they will publish an event or from which relays they will read the replies to an event; _curation sets_
can be used by apps to showcase curations made by others tagged to different topics.

Aside from their main identifier, the `"d"` tag, sets can optionally have a `"title"`, an `"image"` and a
`"description"` tag that can be used to enhance their UI.

| name          | kind  | description                                                                                   | expected tag items                                |
| ---           | ---   | ---                                                                                           | ---                                               |
| Follow sets   | 30000 | categorized groups of users a client may choose to check out in different circumstances       | `"p"` (pubkeys)                                   |
| Relay sets    | 30002 | user-defined relay groups the user can easily pick and choose from during variadic operations | `"relay"` (relay URLs)                            |

> | Curation sets | 30004 | groups of articles picked by users as interesting and/or belonging to the same category       | `"a"` (kind:30023 articles), `"e"` (kind:1 notes) |

Reviewer 4: Suggestion (probably for another day)

```
| Filter sets | 30005 | a list of REQ filters defining custom feeds | `"req"` (a JSON-encoded REQ filter) |
```

Reviewer 2: We're doing something similar in YakiHonne related to the user preferences for content customizations via `kind-30100`. I think its better to include such specifications once for all because soon or later feeds customization will be faced (at least thats what we experienced).

![content_settings](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/assets/29741039/db1b35f3-a884-422b-8252-8f0ca353d85d)
![topics](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/assets/29741039/cd974bee-589f-4d0e-b40a-65a9290447bc)

```
{
  "id": "ed4291ff8ba4343ca444d03624afcee98257aba4af17410a73144ffdc369c467",
  "kind": 30100,
  "pubkey": "1cb0ebecfbe8e291d46c4e082df1e6a183bb321245ef29df5e2703f84b1d86e1",
  "created_at": 1700102857,
  "content": "",
  "tags": [
    [
      "d",
      "MyFavoriteTopicsInYakihonne"
    ],
    [
      "t",
      "YakiHonne"
    ],
    [
      "t",
      "Technology"
    ],
    [
      "t",
      "Crypto"
    ],
    [
      "t",
      "Travel"
    ],
    [
      "t",
      "Social"
    ],
    [
      "t",
      "Nostr"
    ],
    [
      "t",
      "Economy"
    ],
    [
      "t",
      "Finance"
    ],
    [
      "t",
      "Entrepreneurship"
    ],
    [
      "t",
      "Self improvement"
    ],
    [
      "t",
      "Food"
    ],
    [
      "t",
      "Marketing"
    ],
    [
      "t",
      "Art"
    ],
    [
      "t",
      "Photography"
    ],
    [
      "t",
      "Entertainment"
    ],
    [
      "t",
      "Music"
    ]
  ],
  "sig": "4fdc6a423bc7320b432e2edc1e794895468894b92ad7bb9e119bd16c1a6c1d0098bbd8a33ac25856acbae222fda565d7407c17d2b09f6b326de3762ad30a8a1c"
}
```

  ],
  "content": "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?iv=S3rFeFr1gsYqmQA7bNnNTQ==",
  "sig": "1173822c53261f8cffe7efbf43ba4a97a9198b3e402c2a1df130f42a8985a2d0d3430f4de350db184141e45ca844ab4e5364ea80f11d720e36357e1853dba6ca"
}
```

### A _curation set_ of articles and notes about yaks

```
{
  "id": "567b41fc9060c758c4216fe5f8d3df7c57daad7ae757fa4606f0c39d4dd220ef",
  "pubkey": "d6dc95542e18b8b7aec2f14610f55c335abebec76f3db9e58c254661d0593a0c",
  "created_at": 1695327657,
  "kind": 30004,
  "tags": [
    [
      "d",
      "jvdy9i4"
    ],
    [
      "title",
      "Yaks"
    ],
    [

>       "summary",

Reviewer 5: is it supposed to be a "summary" or "description" tag? because earlier on line 50 it says "title", "image", and "description" tags

Author: Good question. What should it be?

Author: I think it's better to go with `name`, `picture` and `about`, following kind 0 nomenclature.

Reviewer 5: I believe listr.lol is already using "description" but I'm fine with any of them as long as there is a set standard
"about" or "summary" might be slightly better working since they imply a single line of text and not a full paragraph

Reviewer: I'm using `title` and `description` tags on lists in Listr. I would love to leave those be, as they seem more applicable than `name`, `about`. I would also be in favor of using `image` instead of `picture`, keeping more in line with NIP-23 than kind 0. 

FWIW, the reason for the `title` tag is that in order to give users the ability to edit the name of a list without creating a brand new list, you have to have to keep the `d` tag constant, so I use a uuid value for the `d` tag in Listr and then show the `title` tag in the UI instead of the `d` tag. This pattern works really well for user defined lists and means that other clients can also allow users to rename their lists, as long as they respect and maintain the `d` tag.

Reviewer 2: > I'm using `title` and `description` tags on lists in Listr. I would love to leave those be, as they seem more applicable than `name`, `about`. I would also be in favor of using `image` instead of `picture`, keeping more in line with NIP-23 than kind 0.
> 
> FWIW, the reason for the `title` tag is that in order to give users the ability to edit the name of a list without creating a brand new list, you have to have to keep the `d` tag constant, so I use a uuid value for the `d` tag in Listr and then show the `title` tag in the UI instead of the `d` tag. This pattern works really well for user defined lists and means that other clients can also allow users to rename their lists, as long as they respect and maintain the `d` tag.

We're using the `d` tag for the same exact reason allowing editing while maintaining the same list.

Reviewer 2: > I'm using `title` and `description` tags on lists in Listr. I would love to leave those be, as they seem more applicable than `name`, `about`. I would also be in favor of using `image` instead of `picture`, keeping more in line with NIP-23 than kind 0.

I think it is better to keep the generic tags for `kind-30004` to `title`, `description`, and `image` or `thumbnail` since it is widely used same as @erskingardner suggested.

Author: changed to `title`, `image` and `description`.

`draft` `optional` `author:fiatjaf` `author:arcbtc` `author:monlovesmango` `author:eskema` `author:gzuuus`

This NIP defines lists of things that users can create. Lists can contain references to anything, and these
references can be **public** or **private**.

Public items in a list are specified in the event `tags` array, while private items are specified in a JSON
array that mimics the structure of the event `tags` array, but stringified and encrypted using the same
scheme from [NIP-04](04.md) (the shared key is computed using the author's public and private key) and
stored in the `.content`.

## Types of lists

### Generic lists

The kind `30001` has been reserved for generic lists. These must be accompanied by a `d` tag identifying the
list, but these have no standard meaning and are generally client-specific (except in the standard cases
specified below).

## Standard lists

Users are expected to have a single list of each of these types. They have special meaning and clients may

> rely on them to augment the user profile or browsing experience.

Reviewer 4: `d` should not be both client-defined *and* user-defined on the same kind, because that results in an overloaded namespace. What if a user creates a list called "communities"? I suppose `d` could be a uuid or something instead. But even then, clients that only want to show user-defined lists have to whitelist the standard `d` tags. Standard lists should be different kinds: 10001 for bookmarks, 10002 for pins, 10003 for communities. This is how the old spec was written, although those kinds weren't specified and people ended up using 30001 for them:

> ### Categorized Bookmarks List
> 
> An event of kind `30001` is defined as a parameterized replaceable list event for categorizing bookmarks. The 'd' parameter for this event holds the category name of the list.

"The 'd' parameter for this event holds the category name of the list." This is how Coracle uses kind 30001 — by setting the `d` tag to the `title` of the list (I didn't actually know about title or description, I don't know when they were introduced). 

Can we not break my correct implementation because of widespread incorrect ones?

This NIP defines lists of things that users can create. Lists can contain references to anything, and these references can be **public** or **private**.

Public items in a list are specified in the event `tags` array, while private items are specified in a JSON array that mimics the structure of the event `tags` array, but stringified and encrypted using the same scheme from [NIP-04](04.md) (the shared key is computed using the author's public and private key) and stored in the `.content`.

## Generic lists

The kinds `30000` and `30001` have been reserved for generic lists. These must be accompanied by a `d` tag identifying the list, but these are generally client-specific, except in the standard cases specified below.

## Standard lists

| name             | kind  | "d" tag         | description                                                                                   | expected tag items                                |
| ---              | ---   | ---             | ---                                                                                           | ---                                               |

> | Mute list       | 30000 | `"mute"`        | things the user doesn't want to see in their feeds                                            | `"p"` (pubkeys), `"t"` (hashtags)                 |

Reviewer: This makes me sad. I know it's super common so we should document it but this feels very superfluous given we have 10000 mute lists.

Author: OK, I just learned that Snort used kind 30000/"mute" but has now changed to kind 10000, so tides are in our favor. I changed the NIP and let's try to get this right this time.
